add upgrage guide (#1235)
emqtt/emq-docs-cn: en_US/deploy/upgrade.md

| 4.x | 5.0.0     | action              |
| --- | --------- | ------------------- |
| 1   | subscribe | subscribe           |
| 2   | publish   | publish             |
| 3   | all       | subscribe & publish |

If you want to continue using the data in 4.x, please migrate the adaptation manually.

**Data example in 5.0**

```
HSET mqtt_acl:emqx_u t/# subscribe
HSET mqtt_acl:emqx_u # all
HSET mqtt_acl:emqx_u a/1 publish
```

#### HTTP

No changes.

## Rule Engine

The rules engine has been renamed [Data Integration](../data-integration/introduction.md), which includes rules and data bridge.

Rule SQL is fully compatible with 4.x syntax, but the actions under the rule are split into built-in actions (republish, console) and data bridges (WebHook, MQTT Sink, MQTT Source), so as to realize the reuse of actions.

## WebHook

The WebHook plugin (emqx_web_hook) has been removed, please use the WebHook data bridge in Data Integration instead.

## MQTT Bridge

The MQTT bridge plugin (emqx_bridge_mqtt) has been removed, please use the MQTT Sink and MQTT Source data bridge in Data Integration instead.

## Prometheus

> The Prometheus bridge plugin (emqx_prometheus) has been removed, please configure it through the `prometheus {}` configuration item or the Dashboard **Dashboard** page.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Prometheus scraping endpoint is by default enabled and there is no authentication required to scrap the metrics.

You can use `curl` command to inspect the metrics: `curl -f "127.0.0.1:18083/api/v5/prometheus/stats"`

If you wish to enable push-gateway, it is configurable from `prometheus {...}` config block. 
Or you could as well configure and enable it from the Dashboard.
```

Changes:

| 4.4.4                              | 5.0                                             | Description |
| ---------------------------------- | ----------------------------------------------- | ----------- |
| emqx_client_auth_success_anonymous | emqx_client_auth_anonymous                      | Renamed     |
| emqx_client_check_acl              | emqx_client_authorize counter                   | Renamed     |
| -                                  | emqx_mria_last_intercepted_trans                | New         |
| -                                  | emqx_mria_replicants                            | New         |
| -                                  | emqx_mria_server_mql                            | New         |
| -                                  | emqx_mria_weight                                | New         |

> | emqx_routes_count                  | -                                               | Removed     |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| emqx_routes_count                  | emqx_topics_count                                               | Renamed     |
```

> | emqx_routes_max                    | -                                               | Removed     |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| emqx_routes_max                    | emqx_topics_max                                               | Renamed     |
```

# Upgrade Guide

> This article provides guidelines for migrating from EMQX 4.x to 5.0.0 version.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This document provides guidelines for migrating from EMQX 4.x to 5.0.
```

> Although EMQX 5.0 does not provide Backward Compatibility, there is not much change in the way most functions are used. You can upgrade by manual migration.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
EMQX 5.0 is not backward compatible with 4.x in management APIs and clustering APIs, however most of the functionalities are not significantly changed.
```

## Configuration

Starting from version 5, EMQX will use HOCON for the configuration syntax.

We provide a new way to configure: **If no value is explicitly set, the configuration item will use the default value**.
Because of this, the default configuration file `emqx.conf` is now less than 100 lines including comments.

Users can still use the old syntax to configure, but the configuration structure has been adjusted and some configuration items have been renamed. Please refer to [Configuration File](../admin/cfg.md) to manually migrate configuration items.

::: tip
Reference steps

1. Find out which configuration items have changed in the current 4.x cluster
   1. Get the default `emqx.conf` file from the installation package
   2. Get the `emqx.conf` file from the running cluster
   3. Use [Text Comparison Tool](https://text-compare.com/) to compare and get the changed configuration items (please make sure the data has been desensitized)
2. Refer to the configuration documentation to manually migrate the changed configuration items to the 5.0 cluster
:::

## Log

> Log output format adjusted, please checkout [Log & Trace](../observability/log.md).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Comparing with 4.x, the biggest change in log is the format.
In 4.x, the log text is mostly free text aiming for good human readability.
Starting from 5.0, we moved to structured logging without losing readability.
For instance, most of the log fields uses underscore as word separators,
which makes it in general more search-friendly, also helps log indexing tools
to index the logs more effectively.

`2022-06-29T16:58:53.235042+02:00 [info] foo: bar, msg: msg_for_human_to_read_but_also_easy_to_index`

Find more details in [Log & Trace](../observability/log.md).
```

## Default listeners

By default, the following listeners will no longer be provided:

| Listeners            | Description                        |
| -------------------- | ---------------------------------- |
| MQTT-TCP 11883       | Listeners for backend applications |
| Management-HTTP 8081 | For REST API, merged to port 18083 |

## Plugins

The previous official plug-ins have been migrated to EMQX as built-in functions. Plug-ins developed by users on version 4.x need to be adapted before they can be used in EMQX 5.0. The following is a comparison table between official plug-ins and existing functions:

| 4.x              | 5.0                                          |
| ---------------- | -------------------------------------------- |
| emqx_auth_http   | AuthN/AuthZ - HTTP data source               |

> | emqx_auth_jwt    | 认证 - JWT                                   |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| emqx_auth_jwt    | AuthN - JWT                                   |
```

| emqx_auth_pgsql  | AuthN/AuthZ - PostgreSQL data source         |
| emqx_auth_redis  | AuthN/AuthZ - Redis data source              |
| emqx_sasl        | AuthN/AuthZ - MQTT 5 Enhanced Authentication |
| emqx_auth_ldap   | -                                            |
| emqx_rule_engine | Data Integration                             |
| emqx_bridge_mqtt | Data Bridge - MQTT Sink/MQTT Source          |
| emqx_web_hook    | Data Bridge - WebHook                        |
| emqx_coap        | CoAP Gateway                                 |
| emqx_dashboard   | Dasboard                                     |
| emqx_exhook      | ExHook                                       |
| emqx_exproto     | ExProto Gateway                              |
| emqx_lwm2m       | LwM2M Gateway                                |
| emqx_sn          | MQTT-SN Gateway                              |
| emqx_stomp       | STOMP Gateway                                |
| emqx_lua_hook    | -                                            |
| emqx_management  | -                                            |
| emqx_prometheus  | Prometheus                                   |

> | emqx_psk_file    | -                                            |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| emqx_psk_file    | AuthN - PSK (`psk_authentication.enable = true`)  |
```

> | emqx_recon       | -                                            |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| emqx_recon       | Old features still available from CLI `emqx_ctl observer`|
```

| emqx_retainer    | Retain                                       |
| emqx_telemetry   | Telemetry                                    |

## HTTP API

> Previously, "Appication" was used to manage API access credentials, which has now been renamed "API Key". And Secret Key is only returned once when it is successfully created and cannot be obtained again later.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Previously, "Appication" was used to manage API access credentials, which has now been renamed to "API Key". And Secret Key is only returned once when it is successfully created, but cannot be obtained again later.
```

> Port 8081 has been merged into port 18083, and the basic path of API access has been switched from `/api/v4` to `/api/v5`, please call the API through this port and path; time-related data will use [RFC3339](https: //datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc3339) format.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Port 8081 has been merged into port 18083, and the basic path of API access has been switched from `/api/v4` to `/api/v5`, please call the API through this port and path.

String timestamps are now in [RFC3339](https: //datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc3339) format.
```
